title: Cars and Carbon Consciousness
link: http://crossingtherubikhan.com/cars-and-carbon-consciousness/
author: buzkashi
description: 
post_id: 657
created: 2013/12/17 01:20:30
created_gmt: 2013/12/17 06:20:30
comment_status: open
post_name: cars-and-carbon-consciousness
status: publish
post_type: post

# Cars and Carbon Consciousness

Greetings, good readers, and welcome to the first (well, second) installment in our ongoing Mongol Rally chronicles! Although our July 19th start date is still several months away, we are already in the midst of planning. And by that, we really just mean ogling photo essays of Mongolia, practicing throat singing, and getting a head start on the obligatory Mongol Rally muttonchops (not really). We'll do our very best to keep you abreast of our planning efforts as we continue to prepare for the 10,000-mile adventure that lies ahead. This post addresses a question that a number of you have raised, and one that we believe merits a blog entry of its own: _“Isn’t driving 10,000 miles sort of antithetical to the Cool Earth Foundation’s whole ‘save the rainforest and reduce greenhouse gases’ mission?”_ Our answer? On paper, yes – driving 10,000 miles is not good for the environment, and we won't pretend like it is. In reality, however, the emissions we will produce over the course of our journey pale in comparison to the emissions we’ll _prevent _from entering the atmosphere by donating to Cool Earth. Bear with me, as I attempt to illustrate this comparison using real figures: According to Cool Earth, _£60_ – a hair under $100USD, at the time of writing – protects _one acre of rainforest_. So, if we donate _$1,500_ to Cool Earth (that's half of our total fundraising amount, with the other half going to SOS Children's Villages), we’ll presumably protect _15 acres_ of rainforest. Now, clearing _one acre_ of rainforest emits _260 tonnes of CO2_ into the atmosphere. (Of course, it also displaces countless monkeys, tapirs, and anacondas). So, if we can protect _15 acres_ of forest, we’ll effectively keep _3,900 tonnes of CO2_ safely out of the atmosphere. Meanwhile, those trees on the ground will continue to belch out the oxygen we so dearly need, while the monkeys inhabiting them will go about their daily mischief-making uninterrupted. Moving along, consider that _260 tonnes of CO2_ – again, the amount produced by _one acre_ of deforestation – is roughly equivalent to driving an average petrol-powered vehicle around the globe...a staggering _32 times_! And the _3,900 tonnes_ of CO2 that our donation will help keep out of the atmosphere? That equals something like _480 laps around the planet!_ See where I'm going with this? If these numbers are correct, then _one planetary lap_ produces something like _8.125 tonnes of CO2_. We’re driving approximately _10,000 miles_, or a little less than halfway around the planet. So while we’re certainly guilty of producing our own greenhouse gases – approximately _3.26 tonnes_, if we assume that the circumference of the planet is _24,901_ _miles_ (as our good friend Google seems to indicate) and that our odometer hits the _10,000 mark_ – WE ARE STILL KEEPING AROUND _3,896 tonnes of CO2 _SAFELY OUT OF THE ATMOSPHERE! And that, I think, is something we can all be proud of. So, as these hasty calculations hopefully illustrate, our little jaunt to Mongolia isn't quite so environmentally harmful as it may initially seem, in the grand scheme of things. 

*          *          *

In other news, today we hit our charity fundraising goal of $3,000 – hooray! While this is an exciting milestone, however, we still need your support in order to make this trip a reality. So, if you've got any coins rattling around in your pockets (err, Paypal account), or just want to help four young lads realize a dream, head on over to our [donation page](http://www.crossingtherubikhan.com/#donate). The rewards packages we've prepared for you – not to mention our forthcoming updates from the road – will ensure that you won't regret it. If anything, do it for the monkeys and the tapirs! And of course, stay tuned for more blog posts in the near future. //Cooper